\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename KRSNAke.info
@settitle KRSNAke
@setchapternewpage off
@paragraphindent 3
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
This file documents KRSNAke v1.17

Copyright @copyright{} 1995, 1996 Psilocybe Software

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through @TeX{}
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo


@titlepage
@title KRSNAke
@subtitle version 1.17, Stardate 7090.4
@author by Petter E. Stokke, Psilocybe Software
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1995, 1996 Psilocybe Software

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Copying, (dir), (dir)
@iftex
@unnumbered Table of Contents

@contents

@end iftex
@ifinfo
@top KRSNAke

This is the manual for the game @dfn{KRSNAke}.

This document applies to version 1.17 of KRSNAke.

@menu
* Copying::                       KRSNAke is free software.
* Introduction::                  KRSNAke revolutionizes
                                    schizophrenic therapy.
* Requirements::                  KRSNAke needs lots of expensive
                                    hardware.
* Instructions::                  KRSNAke is difficult to learn.
* Clients::                       KRSNAke can't handle the job by
                                    itself.
* Sounds::                        KRSNAke makes annoying noises.
* Graphics::                      KRSNAke can induce epileptic fits.
* ARexx Commands::                KRSNAke has an ARexx port.
* The Plot::                      KRSNAke is pointless.
* Fnord::                         This chapter does not exist.
* Why KRSNAke::                   KRSNAke has a silly name.
* Thanks::                        KRSNAke is ungrateful.
* Et in Arcadia ego::             Mysterious masonic message added by
                                    our sponsors.

Appendices

* History::                       It's Revision History
* Bugs::                          Insects?
* Future::                        KRSNAke: The Next Generation
* Contacting the Author::         Spill your heart to the NSA

Indices

* ARexx Command Index::           List of ARexx commands
* Concept Index::                 List of relevant concepts
@end menu

@end ifinfo

@node Copying, Introduction, Top, Top
@example
                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                       Version 2, June 1991

 Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
                          675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

                            Preamble

  The licenses for most software are designed to take away your
freedom to share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software--to make sure the software is free for all its users.  This
General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to
using it.  (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by
the GNU Library General Public License instead.)  You can apply it to
your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it
if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it
in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code.  And you must show them these terms so they know their
rights.

  We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

  Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software.  If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

  Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software
patents.  We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free
program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the
program proprietary.  To prevent this, we have made it clear that any
patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
   TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

  0. This License applies to any program or other work which contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of this General Public License.  The "Program", below,
refers to any such program or work, and a "work based on the Program"
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law:
that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it,
either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another
language.  (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in
the term "modification".)  Each licensee is addressed as "you".

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program
is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the
Program (independent of having been made by running the Program).
Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

  1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty;
and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License
along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

  2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

    a) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
    stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

    b) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
    whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any
    part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third
    parties under the terms of this License.

    c) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
    when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
    interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
    announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
    notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
    a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under
    these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this
    License.  (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
    does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on
    the Program is not required to print an announcement.)

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

  3. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

    a) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
    source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections
    1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

    b) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
    years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
    cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
    machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
    distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium
    customarily used for software interchange; or,

    c) Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer
    to distribute corresponding source code.  (This alternative is
    allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
    received the program in object code or executable form with such
    an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.  However, as a
special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

  4. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

  5. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works.  These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

  6. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to
this License.

  7. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot
distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you
may not distribute the Program at all.  For example, if a patent
license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by
all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then
the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to
refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

  8. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

  9. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and "any
later version", you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

  10. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

                            NO WARRANTY

  11. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY
FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS
TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE
PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING,
REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

  12. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR
REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY
YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

                     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

        Appendix: How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

  If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these terms.

  To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

    <one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of what it does.>
    Copyright (C) 19yy  <name of author>

    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
    Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

    Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) 19yy name of author
    Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
    This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
    under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.

The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the appropriate
parts of the General Public License.  Of course, the commands you use may
be called something other than `show w' and `show c'; they could even be
mouse-clicks or menu items--whatever suits your program.

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your
school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if
necessary.  Here is a sample; alter the names:

  Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the program
  `Gnomovision' (which makes passes at compilers) written by James Hacker.

  <signature of Ty Coon>, 1 April 1989
  Ty Coon, President of Vice

This General Public License does not permit incorporating your program into
proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine library, you may
consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the
library.  If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Library General
Public License instead of this License.
@end example

@node Introduction, Requirements, Copying, Top
@chapter Introduction

@cindex Introduction
@cindex Snake, Definition
@quotation
@strong{snake} /sneik/ @emph{n} @strong{1} any of various types of
long, legless crawling reptile, some of which are poisonous.
@flushright
@minus{} @cite{Oxford Dictionary of Current English}
@end flushright
@end quotation

@cindex Arjuna
Arjuna was surprised.

@section KRSNAke @minus{} the definition

@cindex Cabbage
@dfn{KRSNAke} can be considered one of a number of things.  If you
strip away the philosophical considerations and the fancy evasions of
the thruth about the matter, I suppose you could call it a game.
However, for the sake of argument, let us say that @dfn{KRSNAke} is
not justified by the simple definition @dfn{game} and the negative
associations this word generates in intellectual circles.  Indeed,
given enough ingenuity, one could quite possibly argue that
@dfn{KRSNAke} can be anything whatsoever, including a cabbage.

@cindex CIA
This is, however, not the point I desired to make.  While the question
of @dfn{KRSNAke}'s vegetable status may well give rise to terrible
philosophic strife, factionism, and eventual Hegelian compromise, I
would rather prefer to focus on the therapeutic abilities of said
ophidian.  This would seem a revolutionary and, indeed, outrageously
pointless approach to the military men and CIA directors of our age,
but, knowing full well that I face ostracism and possibly even
persecution, I wish to direct the world's attention to the virtues of
this wonderful legless vertebrate.

@cindex Existence
Or perhaps, on second thought, I won't.  Suffice to say that playing
KRSNAke is a worthwhile pursuit given the fact that more pointless
things, like existence, have been known to happen.

@cindex Judaism
@cindex Christianity
@cindex Judeo-Christian Tradition
@cindex Earthworm
There are religious issues as well concerning this scaly animal.  For
the judeo-christian tradition, in particular, the snake possesses a
special meaning.  If you are a devout Jew or Christian and worry
about playing a game where a snake plays the leading role, don't
worry.  You don't have to play a snake.  You can play anything your
mind could conceive, from an earthworm (which is included in the
distribution) to a field of static (which you will have to design
yourself) or a giant penis (in which case it might be wise for you to
see your psychiatrist).  For further debate on the subject of snakes
and religion, refer to the @dfn{KRSNAke Web page}, of which you will
find more information below.

@section The KRSNAke Web page

@cindex Ophiolatry
@cindex World Wide Web
@cindex Web page
@cindex EMACS
If you really want to read in-depth about advanced ophiolatry, you
can check the @dfn{KRSNAke home page} (where you can also get the
latest beta version of the legless reptile). @footnote{I do not,
however, guarantee that at any time the most recent beta version will
be available at this site, or indeed that there will @emph{be} a new
beta version. I do, in fact, have better things to waste my pointless
life on than a snake with a fruit fixation. You are hereby warned.}

@example
http://login.eunet.no/~morsteen/krsnake/
@end example

@noindent
EMACS!

@section Hegel
@cindex Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
@cindex Snake, Animal or Vegetable?

@cindex Thesis
Suppose you claim that the snake must be an animal, because if it
needs to eat, it demonstrates a lack of photosynthetic ability. 
Consider this the original thesis.

@cindex Antithesis
Then suppose I claim that the snake must, on the contrary, be a
vegetable, because some species of snake are demonstrably green of
hue, indicating the presence of chlorophyl, and that the consumption
of edibles is meant only to throw us off the track.  Consider this
the antithesis.

There is immense debate around this issue, especially given that both
arguments seem entirely valid@footnote{Yes, from the paranoiac's
point of view, the second argument is @emph{very} valid. Trust me on
this.}.  Two warring schools of thought develop, and people are
generally very upset about the question. @footnote{Do you believe
that?}

@cindex Synthesis
Well, according to this fine fellow Hegel, eventually there will be a
synthesis of these two ideas, meaning that the snake is believed to
be @emph{both an animal and a vegetable at the same time}.  Now isn't
that awfully nice?  A perversion of philosophy, perhaps, but it
certainly makes people get along better.  And after all, that's what
philosophy really is all about. @footnote{Do you believe that?}


@node Requirements, Instructions, Introduction, Top
@chapter Requirements
@cindex Requirements

You'll need the following thingies to play KRSNAke:

@cindex Masonry
@cindex Mason, Knight Kadosh
@cindex Priory of Sion
@cindex Knights Templar
@cindex Templars
@cindex Pope, The
@itemize @bullet
@item
Amiga with KS3.0+
@item
a screen with 16 colours or more if you want a colourful game
@item
lowlevel.library v40+, if you want to play with your joystick (but
you don't, trust me) or your CD32 game controller
@item
playsid.library, if you want to listen to REAL music while playing
@item
medplayer.library, if you want to listen to some of that modern trash
while playing
@item
initiation as at least 30th degree Scottish Rite mason (Knight
Kadosh), or membership in the Knights Templar or the Priory of Sion;
alternatively, you can be the Pope
@end itemize


@node Instructions, Clients, Requirements, Top
@chapter Playing instructions
@cindex Instructions
@cindex Playing instructions
@cindex Keyboard controls
@cindex Masonry
@cindex Christ
@cindex Merovingian dynasty
@cindex Weishaupt, Adam
@cindex Stuart, House of

Keyboard controls follow.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@kbd{SPACE} starts the game

@item
@kbd{ARROW KEYS} or a joystick or game controller in port 2 control
the snake

@item
@kbd{P} pauses the game

@item
Clicking the left mousebutton 23 times on the snake's head starts an
MPEG animation of an 18th degree Masonic initiation, with comments
read by Prof. Adam Weishaupt @footnote{Do you believe that?}

@item
Numeric keys (@kbd{1} @minus{} @kbd{9}) adjusts the game speed

@item
@kbd{TAB} provides incontrovertible evidence that Christ founded the
Merovingian dynasty @footnote{Do not employ this function if you are
a devout Christian and wish to remain so, as the foundation of the
Christian faith is Christ's death and resurrection, and evidence to
the contrary would be unhealthy for your present dogma. You have
been warned. Fnord.}

@item
@kbd{Ctrl-C} restores the Stuarts to the throne of England (please
use sparingly)

@item
@kbd{ESC} shuts down the game

@item
If the window is deactivated, the game will (should...) pause.
@end itemize


@node Clients, Hall of Fame, Instructions, Top
@chapter Clients
@cindex Clients

@dfn{Clients} are programs that work in cooperation with
@dfn{KRSNAke} to provide the user with extended functionality or
additional information.  @dfn{KRSNAke} is the @dfn{server} in this
connection, and the clients basically receive various types of
information from @dfn{KRSNAke}, which they may choose either to
ignore or to act upon in a given way, usually defining the function
of the given client.

When KRSNAke starts, it looks for a subdirectory called
@file{Clients} in its home directory.  All files found in this
directory will be launched.  If they are KRSNAke clients, they should
attach themselves to KRSNAke and function as they're expected to.  If
they're other programs, they'll be started too - but generally you
shouldn't put anything besides KRSNAke clients in the "Clients"
directory.

At present, there are two KRSNAke clients available; the @file{Hall of Fame}
and the @file{Action Replay}.  The former records high scores, the
latter records games for subsequent replay.  See their individual
descriptions for more details.

@menu
Available clients

* Hall of Fame::                  High scores
* Action Replay::                 Game recorder
@end menu


@node Hall of Fame, Action Replay, Clients, Clients
@section The Hall of Fame
@cindex Hall of Fame
@cindex Clients, Hall of Fame
@cindex MultiUserFileSystem
@cindex Crassus, Marcus Licinius
@cindex Masonry
@cindex Knights Templar
@cindex Templars
@cindex Rosicrucians

This client keeps track of high scores.  Each player has only one
entry @minus{} this is contrary to most high score tables, but as the
Hall of Fame can handle an unlimited number of entries, this helps
cut back a little on the table size.

The default name offered the player the first time the Hall of Fame
registers a high score is taken from the system variable @var{USER}.
@dfn{MultiUserFileSystem} and similar applications usually maintain
this variable.  If it is not present, the @dfn{Hall of Fame} reverts
to @samp{Crassus}.  The default name is stored in the snapshot file
whenever the @dfn{Hall of Fame} exits, and the name stored here is
used if it exists.

If you're intimidated by the default entries, being such
conspiratorial characters as Templars, Masons and Rosicrucians, you
can replace the file @file{ENVARC:KRSNAke/HallOfFame.data} with an
empty file, and you'll have a blank Hall of Fame.  But really, that's
being rather paranoid.


@node Action Replay, Sounds, Hall of Fame, Clients
@section The Action Replay
@cindex Action Replay
@cindex Clients, Action Replay

This client records your games and lets you replay them at any speed.
Use the keyboard to control it; when the @dfn{Action Replay} window
is active, press the @kbd{R} key to begin the replay (even if you're
still playing; though it's a good idea to pause the game before doing
this @dots{}).  Press a numeric key to adjust the speed - as you'd do
with @dfn{KRSNAke} itself.  When replaying, you can press @kbd{SPACE}
to abort.

Eventually you can load and save replays.  At present, I haven't even
begun programming this.  Don't hold your breath for it unless you can
survive for indefinite periods without air.


@node Sounds, Graphics, Action Replay, Top
@chapter Sounds
@cindex Sounds
@cindex Datatypes
@cindex ProTracker
@cindex Module, ProTracker
@cindex MED
@cindex OctaMED
@cindex Module, MED/OctaMED
@cindex PlaySID
@cindex Module, PlaySID
@cindex Player 6.1
@cindex Module, Player 6.1
@cindex AmiNet
@cindex @file{protracker.library}
@cindex @file{playsid.library}
@cindex @file{medplayer.library}
@cindex @file{player61.library}

@dfn{KRSNAke} can be set to play given sounds with given events.  At
present, these events are at the start of each game, each time the
snake eats a fruit, and when it crashes or bites itself.

I think I ought to mention what kinds of sounds can be played by
@dfn{KRSNAke}.  At present, it supports any sounds you've installed
@dfn{datatypes} for, @dfn{ProTracker} modules (through
@file{protracker.library}), @dfn{MED/OctaMED} modules (only 4-channel,
through @file{medplayer.library}), @dfn{Player 6.1} modules (with "P61A" headers only, through
@file{player61.library}), and @dfn{PlaySID} modules (only one-file,
through @file{playsid.library}).  With the exception of @file{protracker.library} and
@file{player61.library}, these libraries are not included in the
@dfn{KRSNAke} distribution, mostly for the purpose of evading any
legal action resulting from possible copyright infringements, but
also because it's really fun to turn the AmiNet upside down trying to
locate them.  (You don't think so?)

@node Graphics, Designing Graphics, Sounds, Top
@chapter Graphics
@cindex Graphics

Does a snake have to be a snake?

@section System pens
@cindex System pens
@cindex Pens, System
@cindex Graphics, System pens

In KRSNAke, you can define several ways of rendering the snake and
its surroundings.  The default method is by using the appropriate
system pens.  This produces an exceedingly dull but completely
compatible set of blocks meant to symbolise a snake.

@section RGB colours
@cindex RGB colours
@cindex Colours, RGB
@cindex Graphics, RGB colours

Number two, moving up on the complexity ladder, is where you pick an
RGB colour from the 16.8 million colours available on the Amiga.  The
result is, essentially, more colourful dull blocks.

@section Datatypes
@cindex Datatypes
@cindex Graphics, Datatypes

Then there is the datatypes option.  Here you select a graphic image,
which can be in any format you possess datatypes for, which will be
rendered inside the dull blocks or as the background.  For the
background, this will probably be the most interesting option
@minus{} and besides, this is as high as it goes for the background.

@section KRSNAke graphics
@cindex KRSNAke graphics
@cindex Graphics, KRSNAke graphics

Finally there is the big one.  For the snake itself, and for the
fruits (or whatever you want them to represent), you can choose
special graphic images that will be scaled and remapped to fit your
playing area, and that will, more importantly, @strong{not} be dull
blocks.  These graphics must conform to certain specifications
(@pxref{Designing Graphics}), but are really very flexible, and above
all, very @emph{attractive}.

@menu
More about graphics

* Designing Graphics::            When the snake is not enough
@end menu


@node Designing Graphics, ARexx Commands, Graphics, Graphics
@section Designing Graphics
@cindex Designing graphics
@cindex Graphics, Designing

Generally, you'd be well advised to sit down and create your own set
of graphics for the @dfn{KRSNAke} game.  Given my own skills as an
artist, the graphics accompanying the distribution are somewhat
lacking.

And before I say anything else, I have to mention the @emph{number
one restriction}.  This is that @emph{all KRSNAke graphic files must
be IFF ILBM files with a CMAP chunk}.  Fair enough?  Anything else
will fail to load.  You should also be aware that @dfn{KRSNAke}
sometimes needs to write to these files, so they should not exist on
a read-only medium, like a CD.

There are two types of graphics, the snake and the fruit. The fruit
is the easiest to create - this is simply a picture of whatever fruit
you're implementing.  It will be scaled and remapped to fit into a
block in the playing field.  The block size is displayed in
@dfn{KRSNAke}'s status bar immediately after loading. The fruit file
name must end in @file{.f1}, to identify it as a fruit file.

Then there is the snake.  This is a lot more complex.  The snake
graphic consists of twenty consecutive images, each of the same size,
one beneath the other.  They will be remapped and scaled just as the
fruit graphics. The snake file name must end in @file{.s1}, and the
order of the images is as follows, with @samp{*} representing the
part of the image moving in the forward direction, and @samp{-}
representing any other part of the snake.  I hope you get the picture
@minus{} if you don't, try looking at the included snake graphics.

Here goes:

@example

--*    - snake body


 |
 |     - snake body
 *


*--    - snake body


 *
 |     - snake body
 |


--*    - snake head


 |
 |     - snake head
 *


*--    - snake head


 *
 |     - snake head
 |


 -*    - snake tail



 |     - snake tail
 *


*-     - snake tail


 *
 |     - snake tail



 +*    - snake body
 |

 |
 +*    - snake body



-+     - snake body
 *

 *
-+     - snake body



 +-    - snake body
 *

 *
 +-    - snake body



*+     - snake body
 |

 |
*+     - snake body

@end example


@node ARexx Commands, The Plot, Designing Graphics, Top
@chapter ARexx commands
@cindex Commands, ARexx
@cindex ARexx commands

I'll be brief about this, as you can really only write rather silly
scripts for @dfn{KRSNAke} anyway.

@ftable @code
@item UP
tells the snake to move upwards
@item DOWN
what you'd expect
@item LEFT
ditto
@item RIGHT
ditto
@item QUIT
exits KRSNAke
@item NEWGAME
starts a new game if no game is playing
@item VERSION
returns the version string
@item HIDE
hides KRSNAke
@item SHOW
shows KRSNAke
@item WAIT FOR n
waits n snake moves
@item WAIT UNTIL X n
wait until snake reaches x position n
@item WAIT UNTIL Y n
wait until snake reaches y position n
@item SET SPEED n
sets the speed to n
@item GET LENGTH
returns the snake's length
@item GET PLAYING
returns 1 if a game is playing, 0 otherwise
@item PAUSE
pauses the game (a move resumes)
@item GET HEAD X
returns the x pos of the head
@item GET HEAD Y
same with y pos
@item GET FRUIT X
returns the x pos of the current fruit
@item GET FRUIT Y
you guessed it
@item CHECK X Y
returns 1 if (x,y) is occupied by the snake, 0 otherwise
@end ftable

That's all. Check out the example script for an example.


@node The Plot, Fnord, ARexx Commands, Top
@chapter The Plot
@cindex Plot, The
@cindex Windows
@cindex Doom
@cindex Super Mario
@cindex Mario, Super

You are a snake. You are hungry. Eat the fruits.

OK, so that's not a very deep plot.  But at least even a six-year-old
can understand it.  And everyone besides a six-year-old has played a
game like this before.  This may sound pathetically nostalgic, but
I'm of the opinion that KRSNAke is a damn sight deeper than Super
Mario.  Any six-year-olds out there are welcome to disagree. Fnord.

Sorry there's no Windows version.  We all know full well if there's no
Windows version the game isn't worth anything.  Even Doom, an
operating system in its own right, has a Windows version these days.
What a shame.


@node Fnord, Why KRSNAke, The Plot, Top
@chapter Fnord
@cindex Fnord
@cindex Blue Book, Project
@cindex Grudge/Blue Book, Project
@cindex Project Blue Book

This chapter does not exist. @footnote{No, this is @emph{not} sarcasm
at the expense of Grudge/Blue Book report 13. Fnord.}


@node Why KRSNAke, Thanks, Fnord, Top
@chapter Why KRSNAke?
@cindex Presley, Elvis
@cindex King, The
@cindex Prabhupada, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
@cindex Krsna
@cindex Krishna
@cindex EMACS

Well, I originally intended to call the game EMACS (which means
@cite{Elvis Masterminds All Computer Snakes}), but I found out
someone has already made a program by that name.  It's just a text
editor.  What a shame.

Anyway, the name @cite{KRSNAke} came about as a tribute to Krsna and
Srila Prabhupada. Hare Krsna!


@node Thanks, Et in Arcadia ego, Why KRSNAke, Top
@chapter Thanks
@cindex Risholm, Eirik
@cindex Pushy
@cindex Leary, Timothy
@cindex Rosenkreutz, Christian
@cindex Oortmerssen, Wouter van
@cindex Templars
@cindex Knights Templar
@cindex Payens, Hugues de
@cindex Barthel, Olaf
@cindex @file{gtlayout.library}
@cindex Poussin, Nicolas
@cindex Habsburg, House of
@cindex Christ
@cindex Presley, Elvis
@cindex King, The
@cindex Weishaupt, Adam
@cindex Hasselhoff, David

To the following people in particular for beta testing:

@itemize @minus
@item
Eirik Risholm
@item
Kurt Røsand
@item
Morten Steen
@item
Arild Sæther
@item
Frode Wærnes
@end itemize

To everyone who mailed me bug reports.

And in particular:

@itemize @minus
@item
Tim Leary, the Prophet, for His Prophecy
@item
Christian Rosenkreutz for his chemical wedding
@item
Wouter van Oortmerssen for False
@item
Hugues de Payens for the Knights Templar
@item
Olaf Barthel for gtlayout.library
@item
Poussin for the Shepherds of Arcadia
@item
Christ for the Habsburgs
@item
SASG for nothing (except for being quacks)
@item
and Elvis for everything.
@end itemize

Varied illuminated greetings to:

Adam Weishaupt, Charles XIII, Jacques de Molay, Isaac Newton, Claude
Debussy, George Washington, C. Iulius Caesar Octavianus Augustus,
Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, Tore Våg, Aleister Crowley, Leonardo da
Vinci and Captain Merrill Stubing, Primus Illuminatus.


@node Et in Arcadia ego, History, Thanks, Top
@chapter Et in Arcadia ego
@cindex Dagobert II
@cindex Priory of Sion
@cindex Merovingian dynasty

A Dagobert II roi et a Sion est ce tresor et il est la mort.

@node History, Bugs, Et in Arcadia ego, Top
@chapter Revision History

@example
22 Feb 1996 : 001.017 :  Notifies user about important dates :)
26 Jan 1996 : 001.016 :  Optimised and debugged ARexx interface
24 Oct 1995 : 001.015 :  Uses new server notification system
24 Oct 1995 : 001.014 :  Resets itself when prefs are changed
19 Oct 1995 : 001.013 :  Graphic snake is scaled and masked
14 Oct 1995 : 001.012 :  Snake can be graphic now
13 Oct 1995 : 001.011 :  Added locale support
08 Oct 1995 : 001.010 :  Optimised the score updating a little.
08 Oct 1995 : 001.009 :  Oops.. Rnd() wasn't properly seeded. Fixed now.
22 Sep 1995 : 001.008 :  Now is a commodity, can appear/disappear.
19 Sep 1995 : 001.007 :  Added ARexx port and cleaned up imsg handling.
10 Sep 1995 : 001.006 :  Uses new prefs system and datatype backgrounds.
12 Jul 1995 : 001.005 :  Uses krsnake.library instead of internal c/s code.
11 Jul 1995 : 001.004 :  Autostarts clients.
07 Jul 1995 : 001.003 :  Now sends SNAKE_MOVES event to clients.
27 Jun 1995 : 001.002 :  Added client/server interface.
23 Jun 1995 : 001.001 :  Initial revision
@end example

@node Bugs, Future, History, Top
@chapter Bugs

Well, I suppose it happens even in the best of families...

@itemize @bullet

@item KRSNAke is not too thrilled about the Picasso II card, and
quite possibly about other graphics boards as well, though it's yet
only been tested on the Picasso II. We haven't been able to pin
this bug down yet, but it appears that after a while of playing
KRSNAke on a Picasso screen, @emph{something} locks up the machine.
I wish I knew what it was - I suspect the ActionReplay, but I don't
actually know yet. This is a priority, though - I'll get down to
fixing it as soon as possible.

@item Also, the ActionReplay client isn't too stable - or perhaps
it's the krsnake.library, who's to say... Anyway, ActionReplay is
to be used with caution. Well, it works most of the time, but
sometimes it just goes and crashes.

@end itemize

Now that was very helpful, wasn't it? Fnord. Well, if @emph{you}
can find a bug, mail us and we'll put your @emph{very own bug} on
this list! Lucky you... If you're @emph{really} lucky I might even
@emph{fix} the bug!

@node Future, Contacting the Author, Bugs, Top
@chapter Future

The future will be KRSNAke 2.0 the BOOPSI gadget. Well, perhaps.
That's an idea I had anyway... What will definitely be implemented
is a very advanced multiplayer mode - play against a friend on your
machine, against a friend over a serial, parallel or network link,
or against one of several computer AI routines. And possibly
several modes of play, like a snake that shrinks when it grows
hungry, or fruits that disappear after a while, or what have you.

And of course I'll probably code it all from scratch again,
introducing a whole ecosystem of new bugs and inadequacies. But
aside from that, it should prove to be an interesting experience,
both for me as the programmer and you as the player. Now if I could
only get started...

@node Contacting the Author, ARexx Command Index, Future, Top
@chapter Contacting the Author

I myself is a bit hard to reach by email right now, as I'm about to
get myself a new account, and I don't currently have one that's
usable. So if you want to get in touch with me by email, you should
write to one of my friends and ask them to forward the mail to me.
The addresses you can try are as follows:

@itemize @bullet

@item morsteen@@login.eunet.no (might not be valid for long, but
likely the fastest)

@item kurtro@@login.eunet.no

@item arildsat@@stud.unit.no (will be valid for a long time, but try
the other ones first)

@end itemize

If you want to punish yourself, or if you don't have access to the
Internet, you can write me a letter and snail-mail it to me, in
which case you would write to:

@example
   Petter E. Stokke
   Kaptein Bothners gate 18
   N-6500 KRISTIANSUND
   Norway
@end example

Or, if you have money to throw around, or just happens to live
somewhere nearby, you could phone me at +47-71672107 (chances are
you'll be talking to someone who thinks English is a type of small
furry animal, but if you keep asking for me you'll undoubtedly get
through).

Finally, there's the KRSNAke support BBS. You can reach this by
dialling +47-71671605, and it is called Boss BBS. Join the KRSNAke
conference on this board and drop me a line.

And, although by this time it's rather a bit of a cobweb site,
there's always the KRSNAke Home Page (I promise I'll update it
@emph{real soon now}):

@example
    http://login.eunet.no/~morsteen/krsnake/
@end example

Now if that's not enough information for you to get hold of me,
it's certainly not my fault!

Finally, here's a reproduction of my PGP key - remember you need
PGP 2.6.2 or higher to read it (I'm of the paranoid sort - 2030
bits):

@example
-----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
Version: 2.6.3i
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=NsCM
-----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
@end example

@node ARexx Command Index, Concept Index, Contacting the Author, Top
@unnumbered ARexx Command Index

@printindex fn

@node Concept Index, , ARexx Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye

