.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006-2007
.\"      Claudio M. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd Jul 11, 2006
.Dt THEW 6
.Sh NAME
.Nm thew
.Nd the hermit worm
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op -a
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The goal of the game is to play as much time possible biting no part of the
worm's body. You can move behind the screen with the vi-like keys 'h', 'j', 'k'
and 'l' respectively for left, down, up and right, or using the directional
arrows. The pause can be enabled/disabled with the key 'p' or the space bar.
Using the 't' key you can lock the auto-move walking one cell for time.
The 'a' key is provide in order to enable the auto-mode (or demo mode) which
allow the game to play without user interaction. The scores are incremented
any time you eat a number and will be incremented of that number. Finally,
the '?' key will show you a short description of the game with a list of all
function keys availables.
.Pp
The
.Nm -a
flag start the game in auto-mode. To terminate the game just press 'q'
or type ^C to force the exit.
.Sh STATUS BAR
You are always informed about the current game status. At the top of screen
there are 3 rectangles, the first show the worm position coordinates (y*x), the
second show the main information bar (see down) and the third the eat position
coordinates (y*x).

The informations inside the main bar are the follow:

   TS: terminal size (y*x);
   SL: speed level (incremented any time EM is equal to 0);
   EM: total numbers to eat before switch to the next level;
   WM: total worm moves, any time you change route it's incremented;
   UT: total tricks used during the current game (see the 't' key);
   Ss: total scores.

At top of the screen, among the name and the copyright message, there is
a symbol which can be '-' in normal mode and '+' in auto-mode. Use this symbol
to learn about your current status.
