.\" nettoe man page
.\" Process this file with: groff -man -Tascii
.\" man page originally written by Andras Bali <bali@debian.org>
.\" for the Debian GNU/Linux system.
.\" Rewritten by Gabriele Giorgetti <g.gabriele@europe.com>
.\" to be included in the nettoe 1.1.0 (July 22, 2001)
.TH NETTOE 6 "JULY 22, 2001"
.SH NAME
nettoe \- Networked version of Tic Tac Toe for the console
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nettoe
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B netToe 
is a console-based version of the classic game "Tic Tac Toe".
It's playable against computer AI, a player on the same machine or
with another player over the network.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-nc\fr, \fB\-\-no-colors\fR
disable colors
.TP
\fB\-nb\fr, \fB\-\-no-beep\fR
disable beeps
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
display this help and exit
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
output version information and exit
.PP
.SH "HOW TO PLAY"
First decide who will host the game. (you or your friend/opponent)
.PP
Now the one who is going to host the game must (do the following):   
.PP
1. run nettoe (Doh)
.PP
2. choose the option 3 (Two players over network) from the Main Menu
.PP
3. choose the option 1 (Host the Game) from the Network Game Menu
.PP
4. type in his name or nickname (NO BLANK SPACES ALLOWED).    
.PP
5. comunicate the IP address to the other player.
( hostname also works... if resolved, of course)
( I hope you know how to get your IP address...)
.PP
6. Just wait for the other player to connect to your host.
.PP
Now for the other player (the one who is going to connect to the hosted game ):
.PP
1. run nettoe (really ?, Yaeh relly.)
.PP
2. choose the option 3 (Two players over network) from the Main Menu
.PP
3. choose the option 2 (Connect to a host) from the Network Game Menu
.PP
4. type your name or nickname (NO BLANK SPACES ALLOWED).
.PP
5. type in the IP address of the host (with dots) or the hostname.
IP address example: 192.168.0.5
.br
Hostname example  : myfriend.hostname.com (must be a valid hostname)
.PP
6. Just wait for the game to start .
.PP
Enjoy. And if you have any problem just let me know.
.SH AVAILABILTY   
The latest version of this program can be found at
http://nettoe.sourceforge.net
.SH BUGS
See the BUGS file in the netToe source package for a list of known bugs.
Report bugs to <g.gabriele@europe.com>
.SH AUTHOR
netToe is written by Gabriele Giorgetti <g.gabriele@europe.com>
.PP
This manual page was initially written by Andras Bali <bali@debian.org>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system and rewritten by Gabriele Giorgetti
<g.gabriele@europe.com> to be distributed within the netToe source package.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2000,2001 Gabriele Giorgetti
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
