.TH CUYO 6 "2008-2-13"
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
cuyo - Tetris-like game with many suprises
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcuyo\fR [\fB\-s\fR] [\fIld-file\fR]
.\".br
.\".B cuyo
.\".RI \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
Use A, D, W and S or the arrow keys to move left, move right, turn and
drop the falling piece. Try to put blobs of the same color
togehter. (You don't need to form rows or columns. Any shape will do.)
When enough blobs of the same color are connected, they
explode. (What "enough" means depends on the level.)  Try to make
explosions next to the the grass (or whatever there is in the level
instead of the grass). Then, it will explode, too. The level is finished when
no grass is left.
.br
In some levels, you will need a chain reaction to get rid of the
grass-equivalent. And many other things may happen in other levels.
.br
In two-player-mode, each time one player causes an explosion, the other
one gets grey things (which explode when something else explodes
next to them). If one player builds a too big tower, the other player
gets one of his rows.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-s
"Small": Scale everything down to 75%. Good for small screens or slow
remote X connections.
.PP
Apart from that, there are some more undocumented options.
.P
If you're trying to design own levels,
you can pass the name of your .ld file (level description file) to test
the level. If you do that, this will be the only available level.
.\".SH FILES
.\"Cuyo needs a file called
.\".I main.ld
.\"- the main description file for the levels. It includes a lot of other
.\"\fI.ld\fR files. Also, a directory called
.\".I pics
.\"is needed, with all these small icons in it. Cuyo will look for both in
.\"different paths. If it has been installed correctly, you should have
.\"no problems.
.SH CREATING OWN LEVELS
The main work is to draw all those little icons. Then you have
to create a level description file which tells cuyo how to put everything together. Up to now there's no complete documentation, and
moreover, the level description language is still under development and
probably rather buggy.
.P
The best way to start is probably to look at the file \fIexample.ld\fR,
which is a level description file of an 
example level with many comments. (It should be part of the cuyo distribution and lies probably in the same directory as the other cuyo level description
files.)
.P
Other Sources of information are:
.TP 2
-
Try \fIman cual\fR. Cual - the Cuyo Animation Language - is the
language in which the levels are programmed.
.TP
-
And of course, there are the level description files of the existing levels
(files ending in \fI.ld\fR, probably located somewhere like
\fI/usr/share/games/cuyo/\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcual\fP(6)
.SH BUGS
The level description language is still under development.
.br
In the preferences dialog, some keys are not displayed correctly.
.br
The AI Player is not very intelligent. In particular, it doesn't understand
most of the special features of the levels, and so, it sometimes
behaves very silly.
.br
See the 
.I TODO
file for other bugs.
.SH AUTHORS
Mainly Immanuel Halupczok <cuyo@karimmi.de>.
.br
Other contributors to the source code:
Bernhard R. Link, Mark Weyer, Bernhard Seckinger.
.br
Other contributors of levels:
Daniela Lipps, Simon Huggenberger.
