.TH MORTAR 6 "Version 0.5" Mortar GAMES

.nf
	@@@@@@@@@@    @@@@@@   @@@@@@@   @@@@@@@   @@@@@@   @@@@@@@
	@@@@@@@@@@@  @@@@@@@@  @@@@@@@@  @@@@@@@  @@@@@@@@  @@@@@@@@
	@@! @@! @@!  @@!  @@@  @@!  @@@    @@!    @@!  @@@  @@!  @@@
	!@! !@! !@!  !@!  @!@  !@!  @!@    !@!    !@!  @!@  !@!  @!@
	@!! !!@ @!@  @!@  !@!  @!@!!@!     @!!    @!@!@!@!  @!@!!@!
	!@!   ! !@!  !@!  !!!  !!@!@!      !!!    !!!@!!!!  !!@!@!
	!!:     !!:  !!:  !!!  !!: :!!     !!:    !!:  !!!  !!: :!!
	:!:     :!:  :!:  !:!  :!:  !:!    :!:    :!:  !:!  :!:  !:!
	:::     ::   ::::: ::  ::   :::     ::    ::   :::  ::   :::
	 :      :     : :  :    :   : :     :      :   : :   :   : :
.fi


.SH DESCRIPTION

Mortar is a sideview, multiplayer artillery game, somewhat similar to
Atari Ballerburg, DOS Scorched Earth and Amiga Scorched Tanks.

Game is composed of one or more rounds where players battle on a
randomly generated landscape.  Each player selects in turn ammunitation
and shoots it at another player, intending to inflict some damage on
him/her/it.  Players are represented by cannons, possibly having shields
which at first protect player from damage.  After shields have been
weared down and player's energy is exhausted, the player's cannon
explodes and the round is over for him/her/it.  Round continues until
only one player is left (or none).

Between rounds players may purchase more ammunitation etc.  Player who
has won most rounds or in case of a tie, one who has more money left,
wins the game.

The more the players the merrier the game.  Four players is much more
fun than two, so this is kind of a party game...


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
mortar [options] <player names>
.fi


.SH OPTIONS

There has to be names at least for two players.
.TP
.B -c #
configuration file name
.TP
.B -l #
language used in the game messages
.TP
.B -r #
how many rounds are played (1-)
.TP
.B -w #
game area width (may get ignored)
.TP
.B -h #
game area height (may get ignored)
.TP
.B -p #
path for configuration file and data
.PP
You can run Mortar from anywhere on your filesystem as long as you'll
supply it with the data directory path with the '-p' option.  Mortar
starts up by reading the configuration file from the data directory,
sets game variables and reads images mentioned in it.  Most things are
configurable.

Besides data path, only required arguments are the names for the
players, for rest Mortar can use values from the configuration file.
For example:
.nf
	mortar -p data/ You Me
.fi

The default configuration file 'config.def' in the data directory should
be sufficiently commented for manual editing (read also the README in
the data directory).


.SH CONTROLS

All user input in Mortar is given from the keyboard (that's the most
portable solution).  By default, \fInumber keypad\fP is used both for
buying/selling items and to enter angle/power values.  \fISpace\fP key
can be used to select a shot type before shooting.  \fIReturn\fP key
accepts the values and shoots (you can use \fISpace\fP also for
interrupting the shot flight).  \fIQ\fP exits play / game / demo.
\fIS\fP saves a snapshot[1] of the current screen into data directory.

On some platforms you can also use the \fIHome\fP, \fIEnd\fP, \fIPage
Up\fP / \fIDown\fP and \fIarrow keys\fP in addition to the keypad.

Currently you can do only one of these in one turn:
.IP
\(bu shoot
.br
\(bu activate shield
.br
\(bu use some utility
.PP
This way round starter doesn't have such an advantage.

[1] Save format is the same as with Mortar image data files but
you can use 'ppm8to24' utility (included) to convert it to a more
common PPM format.


.SH SHOT TYPES

All shot types are affected by wind and always explode when hitting a
cannon, regardless of type.  The damage done to cannon by a shot depends
on two factors:  how much of the cannon explosion covers and how
effective the shot is.  Every hit decreases receiver's power (or shield)
at least by one.
.TP
.B Basic
Default type.
.TP
.B Backroll
Like Roll shot, but rolls towards you.
.TP
.B Biggie
Double explosion size.
.TP
.B Boomerang
Gets back after reaching top altitude.  Dangerous to shooter with very
low angles and power.
.TP
.B Bounce
Bounces twice from ground before exploding.
.TP
.B Dig
Dives through the ground and explodes when gets back to surface.
.TP
.B Float
After reaching top altitude, 'floats on' until gets as far from top
point, as that was from you.  Then drops straight down.
.TP
.B Nuke
Double explosion size, effect and shot weight.
.TP
.B Roll
Rolls along the ground until ground starts to rise.
.TP
.B Stone
Instead of exploding, this spurts a ball of cement which hardens to
stone.  Minimal effect otherwise.
.TP
.B Surprise
When hitting ground splits into several shots that bounce back into air.
.TP
.B Timer
Flies straight ahead but has short range.
.TP
.B Triple
At top altitude splits into three.


.SH SHIELD TYPES

Except for Repulser and Damper types, shields work only on contact.
That is, you have to shoot beside the cannon to harm it.  With Repulser
you need to shoot low instead.
.TP
.B Bouncer
Bounces shots off.
.TP
.B Damper-1
1/2 effect of explosions.
.TP
.B Damper-2
1/4 effect of explosions.
.TP
.B Damper-3
1/8 effect of explosions.
.TP
.B Passer
Lets shots pass through the cannon.
.TP
.B Pay-backer
Sends shots back where they came from.
.TP
.B Repulser
Pushes shots upwards.
.TP
.B Teleporter
Teleports shots away.


.SH UTILITIES

Note that parachute minimizes just the effect of dropping, banging
against ground on the way down still damages you.  Suiciding prevents
others from getting kill bonus from you.
.TP
.B Parachute
Gives you safer droppings.
.TP
.B Power Up
Gives you more power (20% of max).
.TP
.B Suicide
Die with a BANG!


.SH GAMING HINTS

Shields are fairly efficient, so if your opponent takes one,
you'd better take one too.  Most shields act on contact, so
you should aim *beside* your opponent.

When running low on energy (NOTE: since v5.4 hits don't
decrease energy anymore) there are few things you could do,
assuming you have bought the right utilities:
.IP
\(bu Increase your energy with a battery.
.IP
\(bu Apply a shield, it will protect you for a while.  Because this is
expensive, you might need to concider whether the pay off will be enough.
.IP
\(bu Use bounce, roll or dig shots to extend your range.  Float shot
might also help sometimes.
.IP
\(bu If there's nothing else you can do, suicide.
.PP
The generic tactic is to concentrate to the most threatening opponent
(usually the one nearest you), aim with basic shot(s) (if you don't have
many special shots) and then dump on him/her the worst you got.
Depending on your situation, concentrating on the weakest opponent might
sometimes be most profitable, especially if you're going to die soon but
need to get the kill bonus, or if you don't want somebody else to get
the bonus.

Btw.  with multiple shots (triple, surprise) it's possible to raise your
hit-% over 100.  :-)


.SH SUPPORTED PLATFORMS

The generic Mortar code can work with any screen size and graphics
will be scaled to the size requested by user (or overridden by the
underlying graphics backend).  Following platforms are supported:

.TP
.B W
Monochrome / color W servers (Linux, MiNT).
.TP
.B DOS
320x200x256 (VGA) and 640x480x256 (VESA) resolutions.
.TP
.B TOS
Monochrome and 4/8-bit Atari resolutions.
.TP
.B Amiga OS
8-bit modes (all Amiga graphics boards and AGA).
.TP
.B libGGI
Allows running Mortar in several bit depths on many different platforms
such as X, SVGAlib and linux-fb.  You need a rather new version because
ggiFlushRegion() function which was added to libGGI on March 1999.
.TP
.B Linux >= v2.1.1xx framebuffers
Currently only 8-bit chynky modes are supported (untested 'pilot-linux'
version supports monochrome).  If this freezes, try disabling sound from
the config file.
.PP

At the moment Mortar supports TOS XBIOS sound effects, Amiga Paula soundchip
and GSI, Generic Sound Interface, that's available for some unix platforms.
GSI driver needs GSI server and includes from:
.nf
	http://www.xs4all.nl/~whs/
.fi


.SH LICENCE

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms specified in the GNU Public Licence (GPL).

If you use any of the Mortar code in your own GPL programs, it
would be nice if you would mention that somewhere in your source
code or documentation...


.SH WARRANTY

None.


.SH COPYRIGHT HOLDERS

Mortar as a whole:
.nf
	Eero Tamminen <t150315@cc.tut.fi>
.fi

LibGGI port with support for several bitdepths:
.nf
	 Andrew Apted <andrew.apted@ggi-project.org>
.fi

Amiga OS port:
.nf
	Frank Wille <frank@phoenix.owl.de>
.fi

GSI client (GSI sound code):
.nf
	Wouter Scholten <whs@xs4all.nl>
.fi

Large part of the win-lfb.c framebuffer code and win-tos.c
chynky->planar conversion code were originally from Torsten
Scherer's W window system (now GPL).  Thanks!


.SH SEE ALSO

There's also a networked (client-server) GPL successor for "Scorched
Earth'" called Koth, "King of The Hill", which uses libGGI and 16-bit
graphics for explosion effects and shaded sky.  See:
.nf
	Peter Amstutz <tetron@student.umass.edu>
	http://www-unix.oit.umass.edu/~tetron/
.fi
