.TH ALIENPOOL 6 "March 27, 2004"

.SH NAME
 \- an arcade-style game inspired by both "Asteroids" and "pool".
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B alienpool
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBAlien Pool\fP is a 3rd-person overhead space shooter that is
guaranteed (or your money back!) to keep you busy for hours. The
objective is to destroy all of the aliens by shooting them into each
other. Aliens that have been hit by bullets become "dumb," and bounce
around the screen, making other aliens dumb as they become hit. The
game will continue indefinitely until the player's health reaches
zero, at which point the player is dead. An alien that comes in
contact with the ship will inflict 10 points of damage, and a bullet
will inflict 5 points of damage.
.PP
Only one shot can be fired at a time. As long as a bullet is in the
field, the player's gun will not function.
.PP
There are three types of bonuses that can be obtained. The first are
health bonuses, which restore 20 points of health. The second are
hyperspace bonuses, which enable the player to engage
hyperspace. Hyperspace immediately warps the player to a random
location in the field. The third bonus is the supershoot, which allows
the player to shoot rapidly, not restricted to one shot at a time.
.PP
Immunity is granted whenever the player is hit, or after a hyperspace
warp. The immunity only lasts for a few seconds, and gives the player
the opportunity to escape a sticky situation.

.SH CONTROLS
The LEFT and RIGHT arrow keys are used to rotate the ship. The UP
arrow causes the ship to thrust forward.  The SPACE key shoots a
bullet, and hyperspace is engaged by hitting the H key.

.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Michael J. Korman <mike@taequin.org>.
