.\" $Id: cosmosmash.6,v 1.9 2007/06/21 01:26:32 sarrazip Exp $
.\" Cosmosmash manual page
.\"
.\" cosmosmash - A hamburger-smashing video game.
.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2004 Pierre Sarrazin <http://sarrazip.com/>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
.\" as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
.\" of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA
.\" 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\"
.TH COSMOSMASH "6" "June 20th, 2007" "" ""
.SH NAME
cosmosmash \- a clone of the Intellivision(TM) game Astrosmash(TM)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cosmosmash
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBcosmosmash\fR
is a game where you control a base that must destroy
rocks before they hit the ground, or you lose points.
You must also prevent "spinners" from touching the ground,
or your base will explode.
.PP
Press the \fBSpace\fR key to start a standard game,
or \fBE\fR to start a game with "extensions" (more on that below).
Use the \fBleft and right arrow keys\fR to move your base.
Use the \fBbottom arrow key\fR to use hyperspace: it instantly
puts your base at a random position.
Use the \fBP key\fR to pause the game, and to resume it afterwards.
Press the \fBEscape\fR key to quit the game.
.PP 
\fBExtensions\fR to the original Astrosmash game include an occasional
falling question mark which, when shot, boosts your base's abilities
for a few seconds.
Also, bonus lives are given less often.
.PP 
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Display a help page and exit
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Display version information and exit
.TP
\fB\-\-initial\-score=N\fR
Starts the game at score N (where N must be an integer greater
or equal to zero).  This is useful to try the game at higher levels
of difficulty.
.TP
\fB\-\-ms\-per\-frame=N\fR
N milliseconds per animation frame.  Default is 58.
Minimum is 1.  Maximum is 1000.  50 means 20 frames per second.
.TP
\fB\-\-mirror\-hyperspace\fR
Hyperspace puts the base at a position at the opposite of the center.
For example, if the base is 100 pixels to the left of the center,
it will end up 100 pixels to the right.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-sound\fR
Disables the sound effects.
.TP
\fB\-\-full\-screen\fR
Runs the game in full screen mode.
.TP
\fB\-\-auto\fR
Tells the computer to control the base itself, for the enjoyment
of the more passive user.
.SH LICENSE
This program is free software; you may redistribute it under the terms of
the GNU General Public License.  This program has absolutely no warranty.
.SH AUTHOR
Pierre Sarrazin
.SH FILES
This program uses the
\fBflatzebra\fR library, by the same author.
It is available on the Web at the Cosmosmash Home Page.
This library is itself based on the SDL graphics library
(see http://www.libsdl.org).
.PP
See the Cosmosmash Home Page:
.br
http://sarrazip.com/dev/cosmosmash.html
.SH BUGS
There is no sound effect specifically for the spinners.
.br
There is no cadence sound.
.br
High scores are not remembered.
.PP
No attempt was made to emulate the exact behavior of the original game.
